[Music]
there are two editors in linux which
work on the terminal environment and
give you a visual appearance one is
called the pico and other is called the
nano so let us look at those so which
pico
and if there is an editor like that
which nano
and sure enough there's an editor like
that so we want to look at
uh how these are implemented so the pico
editor let us look at it
less minus l user bin pico and it looks
like it's a symbolic link to something
else so now i want to go and look at
what is that file and now that is a
symbolic link to something else
let me look at what is that and you can
see that finally there is an application
called nano so when you are invoking
pico editor in ubuntu
20.04 at least
then actually you are only calling nano
editor okay and if you want to
refer to these
links you could also use a command
called read link
minus f
and slash user slash pin slash pico and
it will tell you ultimately after
whatever number of hops what is the
final
executable it is pointing to so read
link is a very good utility so you can
actually
know about it by using the man page so
it says resolved
symbolic links or canonical file names
has to be printed onto the screen so
that's a very useful utility that you
may want to look at so basically whether
you run pico or nano it's the same
editor so we may as well call it by the
actual name namely nano so nano editor
can be started now which file we would
like to edit so i want to
use the nano editor to show you the so
called bash rc file so my ls minus l dot
rc so this is a file which is not very
big and it is used every time that you
open the bash shell
and certain commands that are written in
this bash rc are going to be executed
so
i don't want to make any mistake of
changing it
and then ending up with some errors so
what i would do is i will make a copy of
it and then go on to change it so i
would say copy dot bash rc and then i
want to copy to my home directory
something else so i would say
test
dot dash rc
okay now i have a file which i can go
and play with it so i would use
the i would use the nano editor to play
with the test dot rc
so you can see that the nano editor
looks fairly
visual because you have a cursor that is
blinking at the corner here you can see
that is blinking at the very first
character
and
it is also sensitive to the syntax so
any line in a shell script that starts
with the hash is a comment so you can
see that it is showing the comments in a
different color and then there are some
loops that we would actually understand
in a moment which are applicable for a
batch language and then
there are lines which are actually
active so which are shown in white color
and you can also separate out the words
from operators so they are also colored
differently even options are being
colored in differently
and so this is a shell script which is
being executed every time you run
the bash executable so all these
commands are being run and they are
basically preparing the environment for
your bash
shell to be there now here are some
aliases which i have added to my bash rc
so that when i type ll it would execute
the command ls minus alf and when i type
the command l it will run ls minus cf so
it is just my own way of shortening the
commands by using aliases
and you can put anything else in the end
and those commands will always be
applicable so you could actually go on
to edit now so let us say i want to edit
this file and first initially start with
a command so you can say edited on and
then we can give a date okay so let us
say on 20th jan 2022 okay so you can
write already without any effort this is
like almost like a notepad of windows
environment
and you can start making some changes so
i would also give one more comment in
the end
appended a line to
test dot rc
today okay
and then i want to also
have something on the screen to be
displayed so let me have say echo
then
modified the
rc okay so i am writing a command there
so this command will be executed if you
run that particular script now we have
done some editing we were able to go up
or down left or right using the keys and
we are able to add text directly
and how do we save this so
control o would write the file to
whatever file name you have given so
that is the file which we open so we
will overwrite those com
content using this
command ctrl o and once you have already
written then you can come out using ctrl
x
now you can go ahead and look at the
file once more using let us say
less command
and you can see that
at the bottom
you can make out the changes that you
have just now made so you can see that
the editing we have done just now is all
available in the file so it was
successful editing of the file so you
could use nano to edit files quite
comfortably
and some of these features let us just
review the commands that you can use
to explore the nano editor so here are
some features of the nano editor that we
have just now looked at
so you could save the file using control
s you could write the contents of the
buffer into the file using ctrl o
and
you could also read a different file
content into the current file using ctrl
r at the current
position of the cursor and control x you
could come out of the window if you have
made changes and you want to come out it
would always prompt you whether you want
to save the changes or not so that way
it is quite user friendly
and you have various editing features to
cut and paste stuff
you also have the ability to search and
replace using a control queue
or alt q
and then you also
have the ability to
delete text either character by
character or word by word or line by
line and at any point you can also look
at what is the position of the current
cursor with respect to the whole file
and you could also look at this help
right on the screen
and there are various ways by which you
can move around within the nano editor
either character by character or word by
word or
going to the start of the line or end of
the line upwards or downwards
even block by block in terms of text
blocks or even page by page and also the
very first claim or the last line and
you also have an ability to
use features which are quite interesting
for programmers for example you could
actually use alt n to make the line
numbers visible or not like a toggle and
that's quite useful when you are writing
code so you do not have to have the line
numbers always visible
because it seems to clutter the
window but you could have them switched
on whenever you like to refer
so that way nano is a very powerful and
quite a good editor and look at the link
that i have provided here
to have a copy of the cheat sheet and
print it out and practice all the
commands so that you make yourself
comfortable with this editor
and it is pretty good that
you can actually use it for most of your
programming needs in a terminal
environment
people say that the most complex editor
in the linux world is va
that is because it has acquired so many
features over the years
that the
list of commands itself runs into
several pages
so i will show you some
commands that are very useful for you to
get going in the va editor because if
you can make yourself comfortable with
this editor
then
you almost do not need to know any other
editor in any other environment because
the newly improved version of the va
editor called the bim is available for
all operating systems
so there are three major modes of va
editor
it is a command mode which by default is
open when you open the file
and by pressing escape symbol you can go
into the command mode you can press
multiple times because it doesn't hurt
so
escape being the last character on the
left side of the keyboard left top so
you can keep pressing that to ensure
that you are in the command mode
and if you are in the insert mode then
what you type will actually go into the
text buffer or into the file
and there are some characters which
trigger
the insertion so i small i would insert
the characters from the current position
of the cursor
and
o will insert a new line
and a will also insert
text
as an appending and therefore all these
characters i o u both the capital and
the small
would actually start the insert mode and
at the bottom of the window in the va
editor you will also see
a help that says that you are right now
in insert mode so whatever you type will
actually go into the file so it is like
an alert
and
when you press escape and come out of
the insert mode into the command mode
you could also enter what is called x
mode
that is in the command mode you can
press colon
and then the cursor will be going to the
bottom of the screen and there you can
write some commands which are same as
the x commands or the add commands we
have seen just now and so that is called
the x mode so there are three modes and
we will see them right now as a
demonstration
so here are some very basic commands
that you need to be familiar so very
often when you get into an editor first
thing you have to figure out is how to
get out of the editor so w would
actually write the contents of the file
and x would write
save the contents and then quit
w q would actually
save and quit so is the same as x
sometimes you have not made any change
so you can just quit without making any
changes to the file by using q
and if you have actually made some
changes but you do not want to save them
so you can quit by pressing colonqueue
exclamation
so that you are coming out by force
without writing any changes in the
buffer to the original file
now
navigation within the file in a visual
mode is done using multiple keys so you
can use the arrow keys no problem they
will work but sometimes if the terminal
has not been configured properly
particularly for non-english keyboards
then you can always rely on the hk
l and j characters for navigating within
the text file so i have put an underline
here for j because on the keyboard you
can feel the j character and you see
that there is a small line below it so
that is a guide for your finger so you
can place it on j and then your middle
finger will be on k and the ring finger
will be on l so that is usually the way
that va editors
would actually start working okay
and the k would actually take you
upwards in the screen and after some
practice you start getting used to it so
you don't need the arrow keys at all
but
they also work if there's no problem
with the settings of the terminal and
the backspace would remove the text only
if you are in the insert mode but you
are in the command mode then the
backspace is same as moving to the left
similarly if you press the space bar if
you are in the insert mode it will
insert a space but if you are in the
command mode it would actually take the
cursor to the right side so watch out
that
what you press will be interpreted
differently depending upon which mode
you are and by default you are in the
command mode and you have to always
watch out at the bottom of the screen
whether you are in the insert mode or in
the command mode so here are some simple
commands so control f
and control b will take the screen
forward or backward so you can move the
text within the window and control d and
control u would actually move the text
by half a screen only so that what you
are reading is still within the viewport
but some more lines are available for
you to read and edit
and sometimes let us say you have made
some changes and in a very slow terminal
you would like to refresh the screen
control l would do that the same thing
as what you do on the shell control r
would also do it by deleting some
characters that you have
done with some commands so if the
terminal was not fast enough
then you can actually ask it to refresh
it for you by pressing these keys
you can actually navigate within the
file quite well using va so you could go
to the beginning of the line by pressing
0 and end of the line pressing dollar
beginning of the word
following the cursor with the w and
beginning of the preceding word by b
and by using colon you can also go to a
specific line by giving the number there
so you can give either 0 or 1 to go to
the first line and then any number to go
to that particular number of line
and you could also use the capital g to
go to a specific
line by using 1g 2g etc and g alone
would take you to the end of the
file
and that's the same as dollar with a
colon in front so you can go to the x
mode and press dollar it will go to the
last line which is same as what we have
seen in the add editor
and it will also work in vi
and there are some commands like how to
replace a single character under the
cursor using r
and then capital r would replace
indefinitely till you press escape
and how to change a word so you can cw
change the word
and you can keep typing the new word
until you press escape okay and if you
want you can change multiple words by
using c n w n is the number so c 2 w
would mean the next two words would
actually be changed by what you type
and capital c would actually change the
text from the cursor all the way to the
end of the line and what you enter up to
pressing the escape key would be
inserted into the particular line
and the entire line can also be changed
by using the cc command so let us try
this out in a demo to understand how
they work
you could also do some minute editing by
using x to delete a character exactly at
the cursor position
and you can also delete a particular
number of characters by using nx let us
say 5 characters i want to delete so 5 x
will delete exactly 5
and dw would delete the word d2w would
delete two words capital d would delete
from the cursor to the rest of the line
and dd would delete the whole line and
let us say 10 dd would delete 10 lines
from the current cursor position
and you could do copy paste so y is for
yanking the yanking is like you know
grabbing or taking away so
y is used to
copy stuff so y y would copy the current
line and 5 y y would copy 5 lines 10 yy
would compete 10 lines so you can copy
how many other lines from the cursor
position and then you can paste them
anywhere in the buffer by using the
cursor to move around and then at that
particular position if you press a p
then below that line whatever you have
copied will be pasted and when you
think you have done a mistake you can
always press u and then undo the change
that you have done and you can search
for whichever line contains a particular
pattern using
slash and then a string which is a
regular expression and you can do the
forward searching or backward searching
by using either forward slash or
question mark followed by the regular
expression for searching and once you
have started searching you can either
move forward in identifying those
locations or backward by using either
small n or capital n so let us look at a
demo of the va editor now i have enabled
the display of keys that i have
pressed at the bottom of the screen so
that what i press will be visible to you
so you will see at the bottom of the
screen so i am now going to put ls okay
and then enter i am seeing the
text here now i want to edit the test
dot text to start with so v i
d e s t dot text so you can see that i
have pressed two times a back
space that is also is
that is also visible
okay and
now you can see that
i can start navigating the blinking
cursor would tell you where i am
so i am using the arrow keys so i press
k
and i am going up
i press j i am going down
i press j once more i am going down
k i go up
i press j i am going down i press l
i am going to the right side
down the line
so you can see i press multiple times
and you can see how
many times i am pressing and how the
cursor is moving
okay and i now press h
i am going in the opposite direction
okay i am going down
i am going up k
k up
j down
l to the right side h to the left side
okay
and now
the cursor is at capital a
so i press 0 and the cursor is taken to
the beginning of the line
now i press dollar i go to the end of
the line
okay now i press
colon
and then
enter and it will take me to the first
line i press
shift g
and it will take me to the last line
i press a three capital g it will go to
the third line
if i want to add some text i can press i
and then i will be the insert mode so
you can watch what is happening i press
i
and now you see at the bottom there is a
insert mode that is displayed and now
whatever i type would actually enter
into the buffer so i can right now
so i can type something and it all goes
into the text
now i am still in the insert mode
so if i want to come out so that i can
move around i press escape
and then now i am in the command mode
again so now if i press anything so i
you see that i am just navigating now
okay so watch out for example here again
okay i press
a
i am in the insert mode again
so i can say
welcome to line editor
you see
commands let us say
escape now i come out then i'm able to
again
navigate
now let us say i do not like this line
so i want to delete it so i press double
d
and the line is gone
but it's in the buffer as a memory so i
can print it after the current position
so i can go up
and after this current position i want
to press p and then whatever line i have
deleted has come there
now this editing whatever i have done
i can actually save and then come out so
i can confirm that i am in the
command mode so i press escape once or
twice so ensure that i am in the command
mode press colon
and then i am now in the x mode in the x
mode if i press a w and q that it will
write the file and then save and come
out i am coming out of the va editor
into the shell
now i have done some editing so let me
just check are they
visible and you can see that i have done
some change and that is also now visible
ok so line 2 has come here which we
done just now in the text editor so let
me now go back again
okay now i will start doing some changes
so i will go to
the first line
colon 0 go to the first line and i press
d and w
to delete the current word so d w i
deleted the current current word
press escape i am done with that work
now i go down
and again i press d and w i can delete
that word d and w
press escape i am back to
command mode
what i now do is that i delete two words
2d w
and you can see that two words have been
deleted escape and back to command mode
now i want to delete only one character
i can do that with x
okay one character i can delete
one more character i can delete
okay you can delete character by
character using x
press escape and then navigate you could
have to delete by word by word so dw we
delete the word
and escape will come out
and i can also
delete character by character x x x so
character by character also you can
delete
and you can
insert at any position so you can
navigate and start writing so i can
navigate to a particular position
and then press i and i can insert text
at that particular position i am now
typing line 3
okay and if i am done with editing for
now i press escape and i can start again
going to
navigate ok so go to the beginning of
the line using pressing 0
and then press i to start typing
line hyphen 4 space
and then escape i am now in command mode
when i am in command mode if i press
space
i am actually going to go right side
zero and dollar okay now
i can actually also see which file i am
right now
so
f was the command that we used to know
what is the file name so it also shows
that even in va editor
and there are some nice features where
you can actually see
the visual nature of this editor so i go
to the x mode by
escape followed by shift colon so that i
am in the x mode and i type a command
like set numbers s e and u set number
and it will actually show me the line
number and which is very convenient for
source codes
and i don't want to see it i can say s e
no number
and then that is not visible anymore
okay now i want to repeat whatever text
i have in my buffer
by copying and pasting so i can go to
the first line i want to copy three
lines so i can press three by y
three by y i press so three lines have
been copied or yanked now i can paste
them at a particular position so i go to
the last line and say
p and then they will be pasted
okay
now again i go
to the first line
one
and i can now copy just two lines so if
you press y and enter it's same as
pressing 2 yy so i press y and enter so
two lines will be copied and i come to
the bottom
and press
p to copy and paste so i'm copying and
pasting two lines so y enter is same as
pressing two y
okay
now i have done
all these so you can see that there is
something in the front
line one line two etcetera but the this
line doesn't have it so i want to change
it so cw will change the word so cw
changing the word and until time that i
type something so i would type it as a
line hyphen phi and then i press escape
so now the escape means changing is over
i come here and i want to remove the
space by pressing x and that space is
removed again press escape come into the
command line mode so you can see that i
am now cleaning it up and using the
navigation as well as the commands of va
editor now
the ed editor has such and search and
replace features which we can also use
so let us see the numbers so from the
first to the fifth line i want to apply
that
search and replace features so let us
try that out from the first to fifth
line i want to substitute
what do i want to substitute i want to
substitute a line with a capital word
okay
and g is for a global substitution
without that only one substitution so i
just leave it as one substitution first
occurrence
okay and you see that the first five
lines i have changed the word from small
line to capital line
and you see that there's one more line
here
which would be
changed
here also which would be changed if i
had a g operator so let us try that out
i undo the change right now i have made
with u
and now again i will type the x command
mode so
1 comma phi substitute
line with capital line
and g so which means multiple times it
occurs in the line then it would be
doing multiple substitutions so watch
out what is happening to
this word
this word and this word here because
they are going to be targeted by the g
and you see that those have been also
modified along with the first occurrence
of line in the beginning of the
each of these lines
now
i could actually do for the entire
buffer also if i wish so wherever hello
is coming i want to
change it to some other word let us say
hola so i can actually do like this
percentage percentage means the entire
buffer okay that's what we discussed in
the edit editor so percentage substitute
hello with let us say hola
and everywhere it should be affected so
you see that wherever hello is there it
will be replaced with hola now this is
something that is very useful for code
because i want to change the name of a
particular variable so wherever that
variable name is occurring it has to be
replaced and so this is kind of a useful
feature for that
and line numbers are being displayed i
can just set no numbers and the clutter
is now removed so you can see that this
is how we go around making simple
additions or deletions copy paste or
search and replace in a ba editor
so i want to come out without saving it
so there is always a alert for that so i
can say that ok save and come out
and then we are out of that now
cat test dot text
whatever text has been typed is there